Victor Pelevin
The ultimate jest of a warrior

The message about Castaneda's death appeared only on June, the 18th.

You see, a warrior sees himself already dead, thus he has nothing to loose.

Carlos Castaneda

Carlos Castaneda died from liver cancer on the 27th of April in his home in Westwood, California.
Reportedly he was 72 years old.
There were no funeral, his bodily residuals were cremated and transferred to Mexico.
The main theme of Castaneda's books is, for sure, not the anthropological studies, not his «universal energy model», nor his prescriptions of psychedelic's use.
Many of mystical techniques he described can be also found in other traditions.
The main theme is existential poetry of remarkable beauty and power, which dwells all over his books, — and the first quatrain may be called monumental (I consider almost all of them as such).
This is the content of don Huan's teaching — psychedelic stoicism or shaman's existentialism, season to your own taste, and I don't care if the teachings are by don Huan Matus, a Mexican shaman, or are by don Carlos Castaneda, an American anthropologist.

Rarely a writer gets so much acclaim and irritates that much.
Acclaim is well deserved — many remember them been reading a bootleg–copied Castaneda's books in Moscow, at that time heavily decorated with portraits depicting black mages of Politburo, or been buying decorative cacti Lophophora Williamsi in bulk from crazed cacti growers at the Birdmarket while patrol policemen had looked at it with suspicion and confusion.
And the irritation has also its rationale — the world is full of frustrated losers who have their own measure for all of his books.
And the measure is the frustrated losers themselves, that's why people will always discuss and argue about Castaneda's books and life.
But I have reasonable doubts, that the lives and works of those being arguing will ever become a topic for an argument.

Castaneda is the greatest, monumental poet and mystic of the XX century.
Millions of humans owe him their thanks for moments of insight and happiness, and the fact that these moments, probably, lead nowhere is not his fault.
He had written in his best book «Tales of Power»:

«This is the problem with the words.
They make us feel insight, but, when we face the world, they always fail us, and in the end we face the world as we were before, without any insight».


